# POST-ID: 1629
# TITLE: First steps with App::Mist
# TAGS: mist, deployment, distribution

=head1 DESCRIPTION

My last posting seems to have whet the appetite of a few people, 
or at least interested one or two enough to follow this project
on GitHub. Today I'd like to delve deeper into how you can use
L<App::Mist|https://github.com/willert/mist>
to deploy or distribute an application. 

=head1 BODY

I will use L<App::Mist|https://github.com/willert/mist> itself as
example for this mini-tutorial on how to use it.
L<App::Mist|https://github.com/willert/mist> is self-hosting and has
few dependencies on its own, but you have to make sure that
L<Dist::Zilla> and L<App::cpanminus> are present on your build system,
otherwise everything will fail miserably.

In an ideal world, every package you depend on lives on
L<CPAN|http://search.cpan.org>, correctly lists its dependencies and
passes its many tests with flying colors. The real world definitively
is no such place, especially when viewed from the trenches, but
for this post and for the installation of
L<App::Mist|https://github.com/willert/mist> we can make this
assumption. How to deal with the inevitable hiccups in the
dependency chain will be a topic for another two (or ten) blog posts
down the road.

=head2 Installing mist from github.com

The L<App::Mist|https://github.com/willert/mist> repository itself
contains a C<mist> environment and is self-hosting. The script to run
L<mist as a mist package|https://github.com/willert/mist/raw/master/contrib/run_mist_as_mist_package.sh>
is included. For the rest of this post it is assumed that this script
is available as C<mist> in your path (e.g. C<~/bin/mist>) and you have
adjusted the C<CHECKOUT> variable according to your local conditions.

First clone L<App::Mist|https://github.com/willert/mist>,
e.g. via

=begin sh

  git clone git://github.com/willert/mist.git

=end sh

You will notice the unusual entries C<mpan-dist> and C<mpan-install>.
The directory C<mpan-dist> contains a stable copy of all distributions
needed to run the application, and the script C<mpan-install> is a
fat-packed script directly derived from your (or mine in this case)
C<cpanm> that can install those distributions without any external
dependencies. Go ahead, try it: 

=begin sh

  cd mist
  ./mpan-install

=end sh

Run that command as normal user, because
L<App::Mist|https://github.com/willert/mist> will refuse to run with
root privileges to protect you from accidentally modifying your
system-wide perl installation.

This will install all dependencies from C<mpan-dist> into the local lib
(named C<perl5> by default as that seems to be the emerging naming 
convention) for this project. If you created a C<mist> script
as mentioned above, your copy of
L<App::Mist|https://github.com/willert/mist> is now ready to run.
Hopefully at least, this is still alpha quality software.

You can check if
everything is configured correctly with running

=begin sh

  mist

=end sh

without any parameters and be wow'ed by my skills at writing useful
help messages!

=head2 Using mist to rebuild the distribution package

I promised that L<App::Mist|https://github.com/willert/mist>
is self hosting, so now its time to show you how to use your
freshly installed C<mist> to create its own distribution package.

First of all, delete C<mpan-dist> and C<mpan-install>, they are
not needed at run-time. Leave C<perl5> untouched for now, or
your C<mist> script won't run anymore because of missing libraries:

=begin sh

  rm -Rf mpan-dist
  rm mpan-install

=end sh

To recreate the distribution run the following commands:

=begin sh

  mist init    # scan dist.ini and pick up all deps from cpan.org
  mist index   # reindex the local mpan directory
  mist compile # build the ./mpan-install script

=end sh

If everything works as expected, you should have created your first
full-fledged mist environment! And if you ignore my long-winded
ramblings, it was surprisingly fast and straight-forward, wasn't it ;)

To verify the distribution you can now throw away your local lib and
created it anew:

=begin sh

  rm -Rf perl5
  # 'mist' is unlikely to work between those two steps
  ./mpan-install

=end sh

Good luck, and please submit a bug report in the 
L<github issue tracker|https://github.com/willert/mist/issues>
if anything went amiss.

